Introducing new KafkaRoller (#103)
strimzi/proposals: 06x-new-kafka-roller.md

   - Broker state is 2 (RECOVERY)
   - Broker state is not 2 (RECOVERY)

- Kafka Admin API
   - Leading all preferred partitions
   - Not leading all preferred partitions

### Actions
- `Observe` - This is a function to transition node's state.
- `Wait and observe` - This is to repeat `Observe` function until desired state or timeout is reached.
- `Restart` - Delete a pod via Kubernetes API and then `Wait and Observe`. This action is followed by preferred leader election trigger via Kafka Admin API for a broker node if it is not leading its preferred replicas yet.
- `Reconfigure` - Apply configuration updates via Kafka Admin API and then `Wait and Observe`.
- `No action` - This means we reached the desired state after taking one of the above actions or no action is needed.

### Observations -> States Map
 | KubeAPI | KafkaAgent | States |
 | :--------------- | :--------------- | :---------------
 | - | - | UNKNOWN
 | Pod is not Running | - | NOT_RUNNING 
 | Pod is Running but lacking Ready status | Broker state != 2 | NOT_READY 

>  | Pod is Running but lacking Ready stats | Broker state == 2 | RECOVERING 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
 | Pod is Running but lacking Ready status | Broker state == 2 | RECOVERING 
```

`RECOVERING` nodes will be waited and observed only. A Kafka node can take a long time to become ready while performing log recovery and it's not easy to determine how long it might take. Therefore, it's important to avoid restarting the node during this process, as doing so would restart the entire log recovery, potentially causing the node to enter a loop of continuous restarts without becoming ready. Moreover, while a node is in recovery, no other node should be restarted, as this could impact cluster availability and affect the client.

`NOT_READY` nodes will be restarted if they have a restart reason and have not been restarted yet. If it is not ready after being restarted already, we don't want to restart any other nodes to avoid taking down more nodes. 

> `READY` nodes will be restarted if they have a restart reason. If they don't have a restart reason but need to be reconfigured, they will be reconfigured. If no reconfiguration is needed, then no action will be taken on these nodes. 

Reviewer 2: If we want to stop a roll, would the process be to apply `strimzi.io/pause-reconciliation="true"`? Would that put each node in READY or something else?

This solution still has the limitation mentioned in the `Rejected Alternatives` section, that we can't be certain that other tooling hasn't reassigned some replicas since the last rebalance. In this case, the proposed algorithm can be used to check that brokers in the same set have no common partitions. This can be discussed further in the future.

### Feature Gate

The switch from the old roller to the new roller should be controlled by a new feature gate called `UseNewKafkaRoller`.
With this feature gate disabled, the operator will continue using the old KafkaRoller.
With it enabled, the new roller will be used.
The following table shows the expected graduation of the feature gate:

| Phase | Strimzi versions       | Default state                                          |
|:------|:-----------------------|:-------------------------------------------------------|

> | Alpha | 0.46, ?                | Disabled by default                                    |

Reviewer: We should change it to 0.47/0.48 or something. It's just a reminder.

| Beta  | ? , ?                  | Enabled by default                                     |
| GA    | ?, ?                   | Enabled by default (without possibility to disable it) |

Currently, I'm not sure what would be the feature gate timeline as it is subject to change based on the actual progress.
However, each phase probably will take at least 2 releases. 

## Affected/not affected projects

This proposal affects only
the [`strimzi-kafka-operator`](https://github.com/strimzi/strimzi-kafka-operator).

## Compatibility

The new KafkaRoller introduced by this proposal will used only for KRaft based clusters. 

> This proposal should have no impact on any existing Kafka clusters deployed with ZooKeeper. 

Reviewer: Because Strimzi doesn't support Zookeeper anymore, are these two lines needed? Just asking out of curiosity, as I know that the proposal was written in the moment when we supported both.

   - `RESTART` - Nodes that have non-empty list of reasons from the predicate function and have not been restarted yet (Context.numRestarts == 0).
   - `MAYBE_RECONFIGURE` - Broker nodes (including combined nodes) that have an empty list of reasons and not been reconfigured yet (Context.numReconfigs == 0).
   - `NOP` - Nodes that have been restarted or reconfigured at least once (Context.numRestarts > 0 || Context.numReconfigs > 0 ) and have either
             `LEADING_ALL_PREFERRED` or `SERVING` state.

4. Wait for nodes in `WAIT_FOR_LOG_RECOVERY` group to finish performing log recovery. 
   - Wait for each node to have `SERVING` within the `postOperationalTimeoutMs`. 
   - If the timeout is reached for a node and its `numAttempts` is greater than or equal to `maxAttempts`, throw `UnrestartableNodesException` with the log recovery progress (number of remaining logs and segments). Otherwise increment node's `numAttempts` and restart from step 3.

5. Restart nodes in `RESTART_FIRST` category either one by one in the following order unless all nodes are combined
and are in `NOT_RUNNING` state:
   - Pure controller nodes
   - Combined nodes
   - Broker only nodes

>    If all controllers are combined and are in `NOT_RUNNING` state, restart all nodes in parallel and wait for them to have `SERVING`. Explained more in detail below.

Reviewer 3: I think this would be easier to read if you used a sublist for the two cases (controller+not running vs otherwise)

6. Further refine the broker nodes in `MAYBE_RECONFIGURE` group:
   - Describe Kafka configurations for each node via Admin API and compare them against the desired configurations. This is essentially the same mechanism we use today for the current KafkaRoller.
   - If a node has configuration changes and they can be dynamically updated, add the node into another group called `RECONFIGURE`.
   - If a node has configuration changes but they cannot be dynamically updated, add nodes into the `RESTART` group.
   - If a node has no configuration changes, put the node into the `NOP` group.

7. Reconfigure each node in `RECONFIGURE` group:
   - If `numReconfigs` of a node is greater than the configured `maxReconfigs`, add a restart reason to its context. Otherwise continue.
   - Send `incrementalAlterConfig` request with its config updates.
   - Transitions the node's state to `RECONFIGURED` and increment its `numReconfigs`.

>    - Wait for each node that got configurations updated until they have `SERVING` within the `postOperationalTimeoutMs`. 

Reviewer 3: I know we've discussed this before, but the problem with this is that (unlike a restart) it's not obvious (when making observations) when the action (reconfiguration) has happened. There's a risk that we proceed based on a SERVING state that was based on stale information.

Author: This line was actually not correct. In our POC code, we wait for it to have `LEADING_ALL_PREFERRED` so it shouldn't be stale.

   - If the `postOperationalTimeoutMs` is reached, restart from step 3.

8. If at this point, the `RESTART` group is empty, the reconciliation will be completed successfully.

9. Otherwise, batch nodes in `RESTART` group and get the next batch to restart:
   - Further categorize nodes based on their roles so that the following restart order can be enforced:
       1. `NON_ACTIVE_PURE_CONTROLLER` - Pure controller that is not the active controller
       2. `ACTIVE_PURE_CONTROLLER` - Pure controller that is the active controller (the quorum leader)
       3. `BROKER_AND_NOT_ACTIVE_CONTROLLER` - Node that is at least a broker but also might be a controller (combined) and is not the active controller
       4. `BROKER_AND_ACTIVE_CONTROLLER` - Combined node that is the active controller (the quorum leader)

>        The returned batch will contain only one node if it is not `BROKER_AND_NOT_ACTIVE_CONTROLLER` group, so that controllers are restarted one at a time.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
       The returned batch will contain only one node for all groups other than `BROKER_AND_NOT_ACTIVE_CONTROLLER`, so that controllers are restarted one at a time.
```

But this doesn't actually guarantee controllers are restarted one at a time, does it? We need a `PURE_BROKER` group to make that guarantee.

Author: Adding another group for just brokers make sense!

  
   - If `NON_ACTIVE_PURE_CONTROLLER` group is non empty, return the first node that can be restarted without impacting the quorum health (more on this later).
   - If `ACTIVE_PURE_CONTROLLER` group is non empty, return the node if it can be restarted without impacting the quorum health. Otherwise return an empty set.
   - If `BROKER_AND_NOT_ACTIVE_CONTROLLER` group is non empty, batch the broker nodes:
       - remove the node from the list, if it is a combined node and cannot be restarted without impacting the quorum health so that it does get included in a batch
       - build a map of nodes and their replicating partitions by sending describeTopics request to Admin API
       - batch the nodes that do not have any partitions in common therefore can be restarted together
       - remove nodes that have an impact on the availability from the batches (more on this later)
       - return the largest batch

>    - If an empty batch is returned, that means none of the nodes met the safety conditions such as availability and qourum health impact. In this case, check their `numAttempts` and if any of them is equal to or greater than `maxAttempts`, throw `UnrestartableNodesException`. Otherwise increment their `numAttempts` and restart from step 3.

Reviewer 3: I think when you're describing these things you should provide the _rationale_ for _why_ we've chosen the algorithm to guarantee certain properties, like that controllers are only ever restarted one at a time, but that we consider it's fine to restart brokers in parallel. You could use a blockquote so that such comments about the algorithm were visually distinct from the algorithm itself.

8. Restart the nodes from the returned batch in parallel:
   - If `numRestarts` of a node is larger than `maxRestarts`, throw `MaxRestartsExceededException`.
   - Otherwise, restart each node and transition its state to `RESTARTED` and increment its `numRestarts`.
   - After restarting all the nodes in the batch, wait for their states to become `SERVING` until the configured `postOperationalTimeoutMs` is reached.
   -  If the timeout is reached, throw `TimeoutException` if a node's `numAttempts` is greater than or equal to `maxAttempts`. Otherwise increment their `numAttempts` and restart from step 3. 

9. If there are no exceptions thrown at this point, the reconciliation completes successfully. If there were `UnrestartableNodesException`, `TimeoutException`, `MaxRestartsExceededException` or any other unexpected exceptions throws, the reconciliation fails.

> TODO: we need to figure out when to elect preferred leaders and not fail the reconciliation if did not become leaders within the timeout. This does not apply to pure controllers.

Reviewer 3: I think this is easy to decide. We want to do the preferred leader election because we want to minimise the number of leadership changes during the rolling restart. That means we must wait for a restarted broker to resume leadership for all its partitions before we can restart the next one. The only wriggle room is about brokers which are initially not leader for all the partitions where they are preferred leader. But I think that's easy too: Don't bother to wait for those, because restarting them not won't increase the number of leader changes, which is the thing we're wanting to minimise.

Author: I agree with that. I guess my comment was more based on what we have in our POC. I think we need to do some refactoring there to make this work correctly and align the draft.

#### Restarting not running combined nodes

> When restarting not running combined nodes, we will apply a special logic to address the issue described in https://github.com/strimzi/strimzi-kafka-operator/issues/9426.

Reviewer 3: "restarting not running" sounds weird: You can't restart something that's not started. Perhaps we need a better form of works than "not running", wdyt?

Author: I removed this section because it looks repeated now that I added more information in the algorithm step.

The new KafkaRoller will only work with KRaft clusters therefore when running in Zookeeper mode, the current KafkaRoller will be used.

Kafka CR's `KafkaMetadataState` represents where the metadata is stored for the cluster. It is set to `KRaft` when a cluster is fully migrated to KRaft or was created in KRaft mode. KafkaReconciler will be updated to switch to the new roller based on this state. This means the old KafkaRoller will be used during migration of existing clusters from Zookeeper to KRaft mode and the new roller is used only after the migration is completed and for clusters created in KRaft mode.

### Future improvement

- We are not looking to solve the potential race condition between KafkaRoller and Cruise Control rebalance activity right away but this is something we can solve in the future. An example scenario that cause this race:
   Let's say we have 5 brokers cluster, minimum in sync replica for topic partition foo-0 is set to 2. The possible sequence of events that could happen:
   - Broker 0 is down due to an issue and the ISR of foo-0 partition changes from [0, 1, 2] to [1 , 2]. In this case producers with acks-all still can produce to this partition.

>    - Cruise Control sends `addingReplicas` request to reassign partition foo-0 to 4 instead of 2 in order to achieve its configured goal.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
   - Cruise Control sends `addingReplicas` request to reassign partition foo-0 to broker 4 instead of broker 2 in order to achieve its configured goal.
```

# Kafka Roller 2.0

## Current situation

The Kafka Roller is a Cluster Operator component that's responsible for coordinating the rolling restart or reconfiguration of Kafka pods when:
- non-dynamic reconfigurations needs to be applied
- update in Kafka CRD is detected
- a certificate is renewed
- pods have been manually annotated by the user for controlled restarts
- pod is stuck and is out of date
- Kafka broker is unresponsive to Kafka Admin connections

> These are not the exhaustive list of possible triggers for rolling Kafka pods, but the main ones to highlight.

Author: I would say this is all the known triggers so I will remove line 13.

A pod is considered stuck if it is in one of following states:
- `CrashLoopBackOff`
- `ImagePullBackOff`
- `ContainerCreating`

> - `Pending` and `Unschedulable`

Author: Actually we don't check how long it's been in Pending state. If we find that the pod is in Pending state and has an old revision, we restart it, otherwise the pod is skipped anyway.

> - `Pending` and `Unschedulable`

Author: Yes I agree with this. I think with the current roller, the assumption is that we restarted the pod and waited for it to become ready for 5 mins and timed out. When timed out, the pod is retried and then if the pod is not ready and  in `ContainerCreating` state, we consider it stuck. Also the stuck pod is only retried if the revision has an old revision (e.g pod image is updated, we may need to restart it anyway). 

With the new roller, we do have a wait for pods in `ContainerCreating` state. I did not specifically explain this but make this clearer in the proposed changes section.

## Motivation

Strimzi users have been reporting some of the issues mentioned above and would benefit from a new KafkaRoller that is designed to address the shortcomings of the current KafkaRoller.

The current KafkaRoller has complex and nested conditions therefore makes it challenging for users to debug and understand actions taken on their brokers when things go wrong and configure it correctly for their use cases. It is also not particularly easy to unit test which results in insufficient test coverage for many edge cases, making it challenging to refactor safely. Therefore, refactoring becomes essential to enhance test coverage effectively. A new KafkaRoller that is redesigned to be simpler would help users to easily understand the code and configure it to their needs.

As you can see above, the current KafkaRoller still needs various changes and potentially more as we get more experience with KRaft and discover more issues. Adding these non trivial changes to a component that is very complex and hard to reason, is expensive and poses potential risks of introducing bugs because of tightly coupled logics and lack of testability.

## Proposal

> The objective of this proposal is to introduce a new KafkaRoller with simplified logic having a structured design resembling a finite state machine. KafkaRoller desisions are informed by observations coming from different sources (e.g. Kubernetes API, KafkaAgent, Kafka Admin API). These sources will be abstracted so that KafkaRoller is not dependent on their specifics as long as it's getting the information it needs. The abstractions also enable much better unit testing.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
The objective of this proposal is to introduce a new KafkaRoller with simplified logic having a structured design resembling a finite state machine. KafkaRoller decisions are informed by observations coming from different sources (e.g. Kubernetes API, KafkaAgent, Kafka Admin API). These sources will be abstracted so that KafkaRoller is not dependent on their specifics as long as it's getting the information it needs. The abstractions also enable much better unit testing.
```

Depending on the observed states, the roller will perform specific actions. Those actions should cause a subsequent observation to cause a state transition. This iterative process continues until each node's state aligns with the desired state.

It will also introduce an algorithm that can restart brokers in parallel while applying safety conditions that can guarantee Kafka producer availability and causing minimal impact on controllers and overall stability of clusters.

### Node State
When a new reconciliation starts up, a context object is created for each node to store the state and other useful information used by the roller. It will have the following fields:

 - <i>nodeRef</i>: NodeRef object that contains Node ID.
 - <i>currentNodeRole</i>: Currently assigned process roles for this node (e.g. controller, broker).
 - <i>state</i>: It contains the current state of the node based on information collected from the abstracted sources (Kubernetes API, KafkaAgent and Kafka Admin API). The table below describes the possible states.
 - <i>reason</i>: It is updated based on the current predicate logic from the Reconciler. For example, an update in the Kafka CR is detected.

>  - <i>numRestarts</i>: The value is incremented each time the node has been attempted to restart.

Reviewer 4: numRestartAttempts?

>  - <i>numReconfigs</i>: The value is incremented each time the node has been attempted to reconfigure.

Reviewer 4: numReconfigAttempts?

>  - <i>numAttempts</i>: The value is incremented each time the node cannot be restarted/reconfigured due to not meeting safety conditions (more on this later).

Reviewer 4: numFailures?

Author: how about numRetries consistent with suggested maxRetries?

 - <i>lastTransitionTime</i>: System.currentTimeMillis of last observed state transition.

 <b>States</b>
 | State        | Description |
 | :-------------------- | :---------- |
 | UNKNOWN               | The initial state when creating `Context` for a node. We expect to transition from this state fairly quickly after creating the context for nodes.  |
 | NOT_RUNNING           | Node is not running (Kafka process is not running) |

>  | NOT_READY             | Node is running but not ready to serve requests (broker state < 2 OR == 127) |

Reviewer 4: We need to define broker states, or add a link where they are explained.

 | RESTARTED             | After successful `kubectl delete pod`. |
 | RECONFIGURED          | After successful Kafka node config update via Admin client. |
 | RECOVERING            | Node has started but is in log recovery (broker state == 2). |
 | SERVING               | Node is in running state and ready to serve requests (broker state >= 3 AND != 127). |
 | LEADING_ALL_PREFERRED | Node is in running state and leading all preferred replicas. |

### Configurability

> The following can be the configured for the new KafkaRoller:

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
The following can be the configuration options for the new KafkaRoller:
```

| Configuration | Default value | Exposed to user | Description |
| :-------------| :-------------| :---------------| :---------- |
| maxRestarts | 3 | No | The maximum number of times a node can be restarted before failing the reconciliation. This is checked against the node's `numRestarts`.|
| maxReconfigs | 3 | No | The maximum number of times a node can be reconfigured before restarting it. This is checked against the node's `numReconfigs`.|

> | maxAttempts| 10 | No | The maximum number of times a node can retried after not meeting the safety conditions. This is checked against the node's `numAttempts`.|

Reviewer 4: maxRetries?

| postOperationTimeoutMs | 60 seconds | Yes | The maximum amount of time we will wait for nodes to transition to `SERVING` state after an operation in each retry. This will be based on the operation timeout that is already exposed to the user via environment variable `STRIMZI_OPERATION_TIMEOUT_MS`. |

> | maxBatchSize | 1 | Yes | The maximum number of broker nodes that can be restarted in parallel. |

Reviewer 4: maxRestartParallelism?

```
Context: {
         nodeRef: <NodeRef object passed from KafkaReconciler>
         nodeRoles: <This will be set using the pod labels `strimzi.io/controller-role` and `strimzi.io/broker-role>
         state: UNKNOWN
         lastTransition: <SYSTEM_TIME>
         reason: <Result of the predicate function passed from KafkaReconciler>
         numRestarts: 0
         numReconfigs: 0
         numAttempts: 0
}
```               
2. Transition each node's state to the corresponding state based on the information collected from the abstracted sources.

3. Group the nodes into the following categories based their state and connectivity:
   - `RESTART_FIRST` - Nodes that have `NOT_READY` or `NOT_RUNNING` state in their contexts. The group will also include nodes that we cannot connect to via Admin API.
   - `WAIT_FOR_LOG_RECOVERY` -  Nodes that have `RECOVERING` state.
   - `RESTART` - Nodes that have non-empty list of reasons from the predicate function and have not been restarted yet (Context.numRestarts == 0).
   - `MAYBE_RECONFIGURE` - Broker nodes (including combined nodes) that have an empty list of reasons and not been reconfigured yet (Context.numReconfigs == 0).

>    - `NOP` - Nodes that have been restarted or reconfigured at least once (Context.numRestarts > 0 || Context.numReconfigs > 0 ) and have either

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
   - `NOP` - Nodes that have at least one restart or reconfiguration attempt (Context.numRestarts > 0 || Context.numReconfigs > 0 ) and have either
```

      > This is to address the issue described in https://github.com/strimzi/strimzi-kafka-operator/issues/9426.

      - If a node is in `NOT_RUNNING` state, the restart it only if it has `POD_HAS_OLD_REVISION` reason. This is because, if the node is not running at all, then restarting it likely won't make any difference unless node is out of date.
      > For example, if a pod is in pending state due to misconfigured affinity rule, there is no point restarting this pod again or restarting other pods, because that would leave them in pending state as well. If the user then fixed the misconfigured affinity rule, then we should detect that the pod has an old revision, therefore should restart it so that pod is scheduled correctly and runs.

      - At this point either we started all nodes or a node or decided not to because of node's reason not being `POD_HAS_OLD_REVISION`. Regardless, wait for nodes to have `SERVING` within `postOperationalTimeoutMs`. If the timeout is reached and the node's `numAttempts` is greater than or equal to `maxAttempts`, throw `TimeoutException`. Otherwise increment node's `numAttempts` and restart from step 3. 

   

>    - Otherwise the controllers will be attempted to restart one by one in the following order:

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
   - Otherwise the nodes will be attempted to restart one by one in the following order:
```

Nodes would categorised based on the observed states, the roller will perform specific actions on nodes in each category. Those actions should cause a subsequent observation to cause a state transition. This iterative process continues until each node's state aligns with the desired state.

In addition, the new KafkaRoller will introduce an algorithm to restart brokers in parallel when safety conditions are met. These conditions ensure Kafka producer availability and minimize the impact on controllers and overall cluster stability. It will also wait for partitions to be reassigned to their preferred leaders to avoid triggering unnecessary partition leader elections.

### Node State
When a new reconciliation starts up, a context object is created for each node to store the state and other useful information used by the roller. It will have the following fields:

 - <i>nodeRef</i>: NodeRef object that contains Node ID.

>  - <i>currentNodeRole</i>: Currently assigned process roles for this node (e.g. controller, broker).

Author: NodeRef contains the desired roles, rather than currently assigned roles.  This caused some issue and the current KafkaRoller now uses the pod labels to identify the assigned roles so we will be doing the same in the new roller and store the assigned roles in the context.

>  - <i>currentNodeRole</i>: Currently assigned process roles for this node (e.g. controller, broker).

Reviewer 5: Ok makses sense

 - <i>lastKnownState</i>: It contains the last known state of the node based on information collected from the abstracted sources (Kubernetes API, KafkaAgent and Kafka Admin API). The table below describes the possible states.

>  - <i>restartReason</i>: It is updated based on the current predicate logic from the `Reconciler`. For example, an update in the Kafka CR is detected.

Author: It is the KafkaReconciler class. I will clarify.

| restartAndPreferredLeaderElectionDelay  | 10 seconds             | No             | Delay between restart and triggering partition leader election so that just-rolled broker is leading all the partitions it is the preferred leader for. This is to avoid situations where leaders moving to a newly started node that does not yet have established networking to some outside networks, e.g. through load balancers.

### Algorithm

1. **Initialize Context for Each Node:**
   Create a context object with the following data:
   ```
   Context: {
       nodeRef: <NodeRef from KafkaReconciler>,
       nodeRoles: <Set using pod labels `strimzi.io/controller-role` and `strimzi.io/broker-role`>,
       state: UNKNOWN,
       lastTransition: <SYSTEM_TIME>,
       reason: <Result of predicate function from KafkaReconciler>,
       numRestartAttempts: 0,
       numReconfigAttempts: 0,
       numRetries: 0
   }
   ```
   Contexts are recreated in each reconciliation with the above initial data.

2. **Transition Node States:**

>    Update each node's state based on information from abstracted sources. If failed to retrieve information, the reconciliation fails and restarts from step 1.

Reviewer 5: I would say that this is about "loading" or "building" the current state of the node. Usually in our FSMs (i.e. rebalancing), this state is coming from a custom resource, here it's coming from different sources. Maybe we can say it better instead of "update each node's ...." .

Author: I'm not sure what would be better, does `Load each node's state based on information...` sound better?

We build a context in step 1, which has state UNKNOWN. In this step, we are updating this state based on the information from the sources.  So to me, `update each node's state` sounds fine.

>    Update each node's state based on information from abstracted sources. If failed to retrieve information, the reconciliation fails and restarts from step 1.

Author: If we can't get information from the sources, we immediately fail the current reconciliation (that's how the current roller works) and the next reconciliation will restart from step 1. If the failure persists, the reconciliations will keep on failing. I don't think the renconciliation loop has a timeout, does it?

>    Update each node's state based on information from abstracted sources. If failed to retrieve information, the reconciliation fails and restarts from step 1.

Reviewer 4: Ok, makes sense, thanks.

3. **Handle `NOT_READY` Nodes:**

>    Wait for `NOT_READY` nodes to become `READY` within `operationTimeoutMs`. If the timeout is reached, check if nodes need to be restarted.

Reviewer 5: +1 I agree with Fede, it's not clear here what's going to happen if timeout.

>    Wait for `NOT_READY` nodes to become `READY` within `operationTimeoutMs`. If the timeout is reached, check if nodes need to be restarted.

Author: I agree that the second sentence is confusing so removed it.

4. **Categorize Nodes:**
   Group nodes based on their state and connectivity:
   - `RESTART_NOT_RUNNING`: Nodes in `NOT_READY` state.
   - `WAIT_FOR_LOG_RECOVERY`: Nodes in `RECOVERING` state.
   - `RESTART_UNRESPONSIVE`: Nodes unresponsive via Admin API.
   - `MAYBE_RECONFIGURE_OR_RESTART`: Broker nodes with empty reason lists and no previous restarts/reconfigurations.
   - `RESTART`: Nodes with reasons for restart and no previous restarts.

>    - `NOP`: Nodes needing no operation.

Reviewer 5: what's exactly the purpose of grouping nodes based on the state of each. Isn't the state enough to understand what to do? Or if the mapping is not 1:1, what are the rules of mapping N:1 (N states to 1 group)? Or vice versa?

Reviewer 3: @tinaselenge that makes sense to me, but you should adjust the text to explain this, just than leaving it in the comment.

      > For example, if a pod is in pending state due to misconfigured affinity rule, there is no point restarting this pod again or restarting other pods, because that would leave them in pending state as well. If the user then fixed the misconfigured affinity rule, then we should detect that the pod has an old revision, therefore should restart it so that pod is scheduled correctly and runs.
   - Wait for each node's state to transition to `READY` within `operationTimeoutMs`. If timeout is reached, increment `numRetries` and repeat from step 2.

7. **Restart `RESTART_UNRESPONSIVE` Nodes:**
   Restart unresponsive nodes one by one in the order: pure controller, mixed, and broker nodes. Wait for each node's state to transition to `READY` within `operationTimeoutMs`. If timeout is reached, increment `numRetries` and repeat from step 2.

8. **Refine `MAYBE_RECONFIGURE_OR_RESTART` Nodes:**
   Describe Kafka configurations via Admin API:
   - Nodes with dynamic config changes go to `RECONFIGURE`.
   - Nodes with non dynamic config changes, go to `RESTART`.

>    - Nodes with no config changes go to `NOP`.

Reviewer 5: this "go to" are not state transitions but group changing?

Author: group changing, not state transitions. I will make it clearer.

9. **Reconfigure Nodes:**
   Reconfigure nodes in the `RECONFIGURE` group:
   - If `numReconfigAttempts` exceeds `maxReconfigAttempts`, add a restart reason and repeat from step 2.
   - Send `incrementalAlterConfig` request, transition state to `UNKNOWN`, and increment `numReconfigAttempts`.

>    - Wait for each node's state to transition to `READY` within `operationTimeoutMs`. If timeout is reached, repeat from step 2.

Author: I think of them more as the steps being followed in this specific order, rather than branches. If a certain condition meets, the following steps are not followed but it goes back to step2.  Otherwise, it carries on. I can include that to make it clearer.

```
2. The roller checks if all of the controller nodes are mixed and in `NOT_RUNNING` state. Since they are not and it has `POD_UNRESPONSIVE` reason, it restarts `mixed-3` node and waits for it to have `READY` state. The `mixed-3`'s context becomes:
```
         nodeRef: mixed-3/3
         nodeRoles: controller,broker
         state: RESTARTED
         lastTransition: 654987
         reason: POD_UNRESPONSIVE
         numRestartAttempts: 1
         numReconfigAttempts: 0
         numRetries: 0
```
3. `mixed-3` state becomes `READY` and since its `numRestartAttempts` is greater than 1, the roller checks the rest of the nodes. 
4. The roller checks which node is the active controller and finds that `controller-0` is. It then sends a request to the active controller via AdminClient to describe its `controller.quorum.fetch.timeout` config value.
5. It then considers restarting `controller-1` and checks if the quorum health would be impacted. The operator sends a request to the active controller to describe the quorum replication state. It finds that majority of the follower controllers have caught up with the quorum leader within the `controller.quorum.fetch.timeout.ms`. 

> 6. The roller restarts `controller-1` as it has no impact on the quorum health. When it has `READY` state, the roller repeats the quorum check and restarts `controller-2` and then `controller-0`. 

Author: I don't think the example implies that mixed 3,4 and 5 nodes are not part of quorum. They are part of the quorum, therefore are checked and restarted in step 7. The restart order is pure controllers, mixed nodes and brokers.

> 6. The roller restarts `controller-1` as it has no impact on the quorum health. When it has `READY` state, the roller repeats the quorum check and restarts `controller-2` and then `controller-0`. 

Reviewer 4: Right, I forgot about the restart order. Thanks.

| maxRetries             | 10            | No              | The maximum number of times a node can be retried after not meeting the safety conditions e.g. availability check failed.  This is checked against the node's `numRetries`.                                                                                                                      |
| operationTimeoutMs | 60 seconds    | Yes             | The maximum amount of time we will wait for nodes to transition to `READY` state after an operation in each retry. This is already exposed to the user via environment variable `STRIMZI_OPERATION_TIMEOUT_MS`. |
| maxRestartParallelism  | 1             | Yes             | The maximum number of broker nodes that can be restarted in parallel. This will be exposed to the user via the new environment variable `STRIMZI_MAX_RESTART_BATCH_SIZE`. However, if there are multiple brokers in `NOT_RUNNING` state, they may get restarted in parallel despite this configuration for a faster recovery.    

> | postRestartDelay  | 0             | Yes             | Delay between restarts of nodes or batches. It's set to 0 by default, but can be adjusted by users to slow down the restarts. This will also help JIT to reach a steady state and to reduce impact on clients.   

Reviewer 3: We include the unit in the name, so someone configuring it is less likely to suffer from a [Mars Climate Orbiter](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Mars_Climate_Orbiter) moment

### Algorithm

1. **Initialize Context for Each Node:**
   Create a context object with the following data:
   ```
   Context: {
       nodeRef: <NodeRef from KafkaReconciler>,
       nodeRoles: <Set using pod labels `strimzi.io/controller-role` and `strimzi.io/broker-role`>,
       state: UNKNOWN,
       lastTransition: <SYSTEM_TIME>,
       restartReason: <Result of predicate function from KafkaReconciler>,
       numRestartAttempts: 0,
       numReconfigAttempts: 0,
       numRetries: 0
   }
   ```
   Contexts are recreated in each reconciliation with the above initial data.

2. **Transition Node States:**
   Update each node's state based on information from abstracted sources. If failed to retrieve information, the current reconciliation immediately fails. When the next reconciliation is triggered, it will restart from step 1.

3. **Handle `NOT_READY` Nodes:**

>    Wait for `NOT_READY` nodes to become `READY` within `operationTimeoutMs`.

Reviewer 3: Judging from the fact that the next step covers `NOT_READY`, I'm guessing that we just fall through if the node is still `NOT_READY` after `operationTimeoutMs`. But you need to say that! And also explain, if we're prepared to fall though to the next step, why this timeout is even necessary.

Author: I have explained why we do the wait and that it falls through the next step.

4. **Categorize Nodes:**
   Group nodes based on their state and connectivity:
   - `RESTART_NOT_RUNNING`: Nodes in `NOT_READY` state.
   - `WAIT_FOR_LOG_RECOVERY`: Nodes in `RECOVERING` state.
   - `RESTART_UNRESPONSIVE`: Nodes unresponsive via Admin API.
   - `MAYBE_RECONFIGURE_OR_RESTART`: Broker nodes with empty reason lists and no previous restarts/reconfigurations.
   - `RESTART`: Nodes with reasons for restart and no previous restarts.
   - `NOP`: Nodes needing no operation.

5. **Wait for Log Recovery:**

>    Wait for `WAIT_FOR_LOG_RECOVERY` nodes to become `READY` within `operationTimeoutMs`. If timeout is reached and `numRetries` exceeds `maxRetries`, throw `UnrestartableNodesException`. Otherwise, increment `numRetries` and repeat from step 2.

Reviewer 3: For all these steps I think it would be really valuable to explain the _why_. Here we're willing to wait for brokers in log recovery because the following steps will result in actions, like restarting other brokers, which will be directly visible to clients. We prefer to start from a cluster that's as close to fully functional as possible.

Reviewer 3: We also need to explain why are we willing to wait for log recovery here, but not willing to wait for all the brokers replicas to rejoin the ISR? 

IIRC the reason we had was the KafkaRoller's job was to restart things, but we didn't want to give it any responsibility for throttling interbroker replication, and we can't guarantee (for all possible workloads) that brokers will always be able to catch up to the LEO (within a reasonable time).

Author: Thanks @tombentley. I have added the reasons.

   - Wait for each node's state to transition to `READY` within `operationTimeoutMs`. If timeout is reached, increment `numRetries` and repeat from step 2.

7. **Restart `RESTART_UNRESPONSIVE` Nodes:**
   Restart unresponsive nodes one by one in the order: pure controller, mixed, and broker nodes. Wait for each node's state to transition to `READY` within `operationTimeoutMs`. If timeout is reached, increment `numRetries` and repeat from step 2.

8. **Refine `MAYBE_RECONFIGURE_OR_RESTART` Nodes:**
   Describe Kafka configurations via Admin API:
   - Nodes with dynamic config changes are added to `RECONFIGURE` group.
   - Nodes with non dynamic config changes are added `RESTART` group.
   - Nodes with no config changes are added to `NOP` group.

9. **Reconfigure Nodes:**
   Reconfigure nodes in the `RECONFIGURE` group:
   - Check if `numReconfigAttempts` exceeds `maxReconfigAttempts`. If exceeded, add a restart reason and repeat from step 2. Otherwise, continue.
   - Send `incrementalAlterConfig` request, transition state to `UNKNOWN`, and increment `numReconfigAttempts`.

>    - Wait for each node's state to transition to `READY` within `operationTimeoutMs`. If timeout is reached, repeat from step 2, otherwise continue.

Reviewer 3: By definition the node's state will already be READY (otherwise it would have been in the `RESTART_NOT_RUNNING` group), therefore there is no transition to observe. 

It's never been clear to me what would be a good safety check on a dynamic reconfig. Some of the reconfigurable configs could easily result in a borked cluster, so it feels like some kind of check is needed. I think we need to take into account any effects of the reconfiguring of this node on the other nodes in the cluster. I guess step 10 is intended to achieve this, but it's not clear to me how step 10 different from just always restarting from step 2 after each reconfiguration.

Author: The roller will transition the node to UNKNOWN state after taking an action so that the state can be observed again, but you are right, that would likely to return READY immediately. As you said, the step 10 will repeat from step 2 if at the point the reconfigured node has gone bad. When repeating from step 2, if the node is not ready but since there is no reason to restart and reconfigure (because it's already been reconfigured) , we would end up waiting for it to become ready until the reconciliation fails.  Perhaps, we could fail the reconciliation with an error indicating that a node is not ready after reconfiguration, so we notify the human operator to do the investigation through the log.

#### An example of rolling update

Here is an example of the new roller performing rolling restarts on a cluster with 12 nodes: 3 controllers, 3 mixed nodes and 6 brokers. The nodes are:
- controller-0
- controller-1
- controller-2
- mixed-3
- mixed-4
- mixed-5
- broker-6
- broker-7
- broker-8
- broker-9
- broker-10
- broker-11

1. The roller observes nodes and update their contexts based on the observation outcome:

All the nodes except `mixed-3` have the following Context with `nodeRef` being their `podname/node-id`, and `nodeRoles` having either `controller`, `broker` or both.
```
         nodeRef: controller-0/0
         nodeRoles: controller
         state: READY
         lastTransition: 0123456
         restartReason: MANUAL_ROLLING_UPDATE
         numRestartAttempts: 0
         numReconfigAttempts: 0
         numRetries: 0
```
The `mixed-3` node has the following context because the operator could not establish an admin connection to it even though it's ready from Kubernetes and KafkaAgent perspective:
```
         nodeRef: mixed-3/3
         nodeRoles: controller,broker

>          state: NOT_RUNNING

Reviewer 4: Shouldn't this be UNKNOWN from the point of view of the operator? I mean, unless it was not running before and then became unresponsive. Maybe adding the initial state in the node list at the start of the example would help. Something like:

```sh
- controller-0 (ready)
...
- mixed-3 (not running, unresponsive)
...
```

Author: you are right, I wouldn't expect to be checked for responsiveness if it was not running. I think it should be NOT_READY or READY. UNKNOWN is if we didn't observe its state yet. We would check the state and then connection.

9. It sends requests to describe all the topic partitions and their `min.insync.replicas` configuration, and the following list of topics is returned:
```
topic("topic-A"), Replicas(9, 10, 11), ISR(9, 10), MinISR(2)
topic("topic-B"), Replicas(6, 7, 8), ISR(6, 7, 8), MinISR(2)
topic("topic-C"), Replicas(10, 8, 6), ISR(10, 8, 6), MinISR(2)
topic("topic-D"), Replicas(7, 9, 11), ISR(7, 9, 11), MinISR(2)
topic("topic-E"), Replicas(6, 10, 11), ISR(6, 10, 11), MinISR(2)
```

10. The roller batches the nodes that do not have any topic partition in common and the following batches are created: 
- (11, 8) - `broker-11` and `broker-8` do not share any topic partitions.
- (7) - `broker-7` and `broker-10` do not share any topic partitions, however topic-A is at min ISR, therefore 10 cannot be restarted and is removed from the batch.
- (6) - `broker-6` and `broker-9` do not share any topic partitions, however topic-A is at min ISR, therefore 9 cannot be restarted and is removed from the batch.

> 11. The roller picks the largest batch containing `broker-11` and `broker-8` and restarts them together. It waits for the nodes to have `READY` and then `LEADING_ALL_PREFERRED` state.

Reviewer 4: I still think the leading all preferred replicas has the potential of another race condition with CC. Could we made it opt-out by exposing some config that would be enabled by default?

Author: We introduced `restartAndPreferredLeaderElectionDelay`, do you think this can be used to prevent the race condition?

Author: I think they are for rebalancing the number of leaders hosted on each broker based on the replicas (preferred leader being the first one in the list) , isn't it? Does CC rebalance if broker is shutdown temporarily and comes back but the partitions that it is preferred leader for has not been reassigned to it yet? In another words, does it rebalance based on the ISR, where the leader might not the preferred leader?

Author: ah I think I had misunderstood `leader.imbalance.check.interval.seconds` configs and had to remind myself. I guess `restartAndPreferredLeaderElectionDelay` is not so much different than these configurations. However if the roller is the one triggering the leader election, it has its own delay to apply before doing so to avoid triggering it too soon after a restart. If this delay is set to larger than `leader.imbalance.check.interval.seconds`, leader election is already triggered by kafka, therefore roller won't do anything. The operator would only trigger preferred leader election, if the delay is configured shorter than `leader.imbalance.check.interval.seconds` or `auto.leader.rebalance.enable` is set to false. Perhaps the default for the roller's delay should be set to larger than the default of `leader.imbalance.check.interval.seconds`, so we always give kafka the first opportunity to balance the leaders.

Author: `leader.imbalance.check.interval.seconds`'s default is 5 minutes, so that would actually prolong the rolling process, especially when restarting node one by one, so setting the default to larger than this wouldn't work actually. I think we can define slightly different purposes for these configurations, roller's purpose is to simply move the partition back to the preferred leader after it was restarted to cause less partition reassignment, whereas kafka is generally balancing out the leaders across all brokers.

Reviewer 4: Yeah, unfortunately these can't be updated dynamically, so we can't adjust them when the rolling is doing its job and then revert.

### Future improvement

- We are not looking to solve the potential race condition between KafkaRoller and Cruise Control rebalance activity right away but this is something we can solve in the future. An example scenario that could cause this race:
   Let's say we have a 5 brokers cluster, `min.insync.replicas` for topic partition foo-0 is set to 2. The possible sequence of events that could happen is:
   - Broker 0 is down due to an issue and the ISR of foo-0 partition changes from [0, 1, 2] to [1 , 2]. In this case producers with acks-all still can produce to this partition.
   - Cruise Control sends `addingReplicas` request to reassign partition foo-0 to broker 4 instead of broker 2 in order to achieve its configured goal.
   - The reassignment request is processed and foo-0 partition now has ISR [1, 2, 4].

>    - Cruise Control sends `removingReplicas` request to un-assign the partition from broker 2.

Reviewer 6: Why does CC send `removingReplicas` request to un-assign the partition from broker 2 here?

Reviewer 4: I think this is because the partition was moved to broker 4 successfully, so we can get rid of the data in the old location.

# Kafka Roller 2.0

## Current situation

The Kafka Roller is an internal Cluster Operator component that's responsible for coordinating the rolling restart or reconfiguration of Kafka pods when:
- non-dynamic reconfigurations needs to be applied
- update in Kafka CRD is detected
- a certificate is renewed
- pods have been manually annotated by the user for controlled restarts
- pod is stuck and is out of date
- Kafka broker is unresponsive to Kafka Admin connections

A pod is considered stuck if it is in one of following states:
- `CrashLoopBackOff`
- `ImagePullBackOff`
- `ContainerCreating`

> - `Pending` and `Unschedulable`

Author: Currently if we find that the pod is in one of these states and does not have old revision, we fail the reconciliation and it will be checked again in the next  reconciliation. We don't specifically check if it's in a state more than X seconds.

### Known Issues

The existing KafkaRoller suffers from the following shortcomings:

> - While it is safe and simple to restart one broker at a time, it is slow in large clusters ([related issue](https://github.com/strimzi/strimzi-kafka-operator/issues/8547)).

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
- Although it is safe and straightforward to restart one broker at a time, this process is slow in large clusters ([related issue](https://github.com/strimzi/strimzi-kafka-operator/issues/8547)).
```

> - It doesn’t worry about partition preferred leadership. This means there can be more leadership changes than necessary during a rolling restart, with consequent impact on tail latency.

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
- It does not account for partition preferred leadership. As a result, there may be more leadership changes than necessary during a rolling restart, consequently impacting tail latency.
```

- KafkaRoller takes a long time to reconcile combined nodes if they are all in `Pending` state. This is because the combined node does not become ready until the quorum is formed and KafkaRoller waits for a pod to become ready before it attempts to restart other nodes. In order for the quorum to form, at least the majority of controller nodes need to be running at the same time. This is not easy to solve in the current KafkaRoller without introducing some major changes because it processes each node individually and there is no mechanism to restart multiple nodes in parallel. More information can be found [here](https://github.com/strimzi/strimzi-kafka-operator/issues/9426).

> - The quorum health check is based on the `controller.quorum.fetch.timeout.ms` configuration which it reads from the desired configurations passed from the Reconciler. However, `CAReconcilor` and manual rolling update pass null value for desired configurations because in both cases, the nodes don't need reconfigurations. This results in performing the quorum healthcheck based on the hard-coded default value of `controller.quorum.fetch.timeout.ms` rather than the accurate configuration value when doing manual rolling update and rolling nodes for certificate renewal.

Author: I have tried rewording the paragraph, do you think it's clearer now?

Depending on the observed states, the roller will perform specific actions. Those actions should cause a subsequent observation to cause a state transition. This iterative process continues until each node's state aligns with the desired state.

It will also introduce an algorithm that can restart brokers in parallel while applying safety conditions that can guarantee Kafka producer availability and causing minimal impact on controllers and overall stability of clusters.

### Node State
When a new reconciliation starts up, a context object is created for each node to store the state and other useful information used by the roller. It will have the following fields:

 - <i>nodeRef</i>: NodeRef object that contains Node ID.
 - <i>currentNodeRole</i>: Currently assigned process roles for this node (e.g. controller, broker).
 - <i>state</i>: It contains the current state of the node based on information collected from the abstracted sources (Kubernetes API, KafkaAgent and Kafka Admin API). The table below describes the possible states.

>  - <i>reason</i>: It is updated based on the current predicate logic from the Reconciler. For example, an update in the Kafka CR is detected.

Author: I think `restartReason` sounds better. Wdyt?

>  - <i>numRestartAttempts</i>: The value is incremented each time the node has been attempted to restart.

Author: That's right. I can make that clearer.

 - <i>numReconfigAttempts</i>: The value is incremented each time the node has been attempted to reconfigure.
 - <i>numRetries</i>: The value is incremented each time the node cannot be restarted/reconfigured due to not meeting safety conditions (more on this later).
 - <i>lastTransitionTime</i>: System.currentTimeMillis of last observed state transition.

 <b>States</b>
 | State        | Description |
 | :-------------------- | :---------- |
 | UNKNOWN               | The initial state when creating `Context` for a node. We expect to transition from this state fairly quickly after creating the context for nodes.  |
 | NOT_RUNNING           | Node is not running (Kafka process is not running) |
 | NOT_READY             | Node is running but not ready to serve requests (broker state < 2 OR == 127) |
 | RESTARTED             | After successful `kubectl delete pod`. |
 | RECONFIGURED          | After successful Kafka node config update via Admin client. |
 | RECOVERING            | Node has started but is in log recovery (broker state == 2). |

>  | SERVING               | Node is in running state and ready to serve requests (broker state >= 3 AND != 127). |

Author: Yes that's right. It should be based on Kubernetes readiness check which does the appropriate check for controller and broker nodes. I will update the line.

 | LEADING_ALL_PREFERRED | Node is in running state and leading all preferred replicas. |

> The broker states are defined [here](https://github.com/apache/kafka/blob/58ddd693e69599b177d09c2e384f31e7f5e11171/metadata/src/main/java/org/apache/kafka/metadata/BrokerState.java#L46).

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
The definitions of broker states can be found via the following link: [Broker States](https://github.com/apache/kafka/blob/58ddd693e69599b177d09c2e384f31e7f5e11171/metadata/src/main/java/org/apache/kafka/metadata/BrokerState.java#L46)
```

### Configurability
The following can be the configuration options for the new KafkaRoller:

> | Configuration | Default value | Exposed to user | Description |
> | :-------------| :-------------| :---------------| :---------- |
> | maxRestartAttempts | 3 | No | The maximum number of times a node can be restarted before failing the reconciliation. This is checked against the node's `numRestartAttempts`.|
> | maxReconfigAttempts | 3 | No | The maximum number of times a node can be reconfigured before restarting it. This is checked against the node's `numReconfigAttempts`.|
> | maxRetries| 10 | No | The maximum number of times a node can retried after not meeting the safety conditions. This is checked against the node's `numRetries`.|
> | postOperationTimeoutMs | 60 seconds | Yes | The maximum amount of time we will wait for nodes to transition to `SERVING` state after an operation in each retry. This will be based on the operation timeout that is already exposed to the user via environment variable `STRIMZI_OPERATION_TIMEOUT_MS`. |
> | maxRestartParallelism | 1 | Yes | The maximum number of broker nodes that can be restarted in parallel. |

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
| Configuration          | Default value | Exposed to user | Description                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   |
|:-----------------------|:--------------|:----------------|:--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| maxRestartAttempts     | 3             | No              | The maximum number of times a node can be restarted before failing the reconciliation. This is checked against the node's `numRestartAttempts`.                                                                                                               |
| maxReconfigAttempts    | 3             | No              | The maximum number of times a node can be reconfigured before restarting it. This is checked against the node's `numReconfigAttempts`.                                                                                                                        |
| maxRetries             | 10            | No              | The maximum number of times a node can retried after not meeting the safety conditions. This is checked against the node's `numRetries`.                                                                                                                      |
| postOperationTimeoutMs | 60 seconds    | Yes             | The maximum amount of time we will wait for nodes to transition to `SERVING` state after an operation in each retry. This will be based on the operation timeout that is already exposed to the user via environment variable `STRIMZI_OPERATION_TIMEOUT_MS`. |
| maxRestartParallelism  | 1             | Yes             | The maximum number of broker nodes that can be restarted in parallel.                                                                                                                                                                                         |
```

> | maxRestartParallelism | 1 | Yes | The maximum number of broker nodes that can be restarted in parallel. |

Author: I think it's better to default to the old behaviour of restarting nodes one by one as that's still the safest way to update the cluster. Users who specifically want to restart nodes in parallel and make the update faster, can enable this and decide how fast they want the update to be (considering the tradeoff between fast update and minimising the risk of multiple nodes breaking). I'm not sure we should make that decision for the users. I would like to hear what others think about this.

> | maxRestartParallelism | 1 | Yes | The maximum number of broker nodes that can be restarted in parallel. |

Reviewer 4: Well, before you say that parallel restart is done in a safe way without affecting producers, so that's a contradiction. If the parallel algorithm is not able to make progress after some time you could fall back to serial (maxRestartParallelism=1). Wdyt?

### Algorithm

1. Initialise a context object for each node with the following data:
```
Context: {
         nodeRef: <NodeRef object passed from KafkaReconciler>
         nodeRoles: <This will be set using the pod labels `strimzi.io/controller-role` and `strimzi.io/broker-role>
         state: UNKNOWN
         lastTransition: <SYSTEM_TIME>
         reason: <Result of the predicate function passed from KafkaReconciler>
         numRestartAttempts: 0
         numReconfigAttempts: 0
         numRetries: 0
}
```               

> 2. Observe and transition each node's state to the corresponding state based on the information collected from the abstracted sources.

Author: Are you suggesting to divide the steps into phases?

3. If there are nodes in `NOT_READY` state, wait for them to have `SERVING` within the `postOperationalTimeoutMs`.  
   We want to give nodes chance to get ready before we try to connect to the or consider them for rolling. This is important especially for nodes which were just started.
   This is consistent with how the current roller handles unready nodes.
   - If the timeout is reached, proceed to the next step and check if any of the nodes need to be restarted.

4. Group the nodes into the following categories based on their state and connectivity:

>    - `RESTART_FIRST` - Nodes that have `NOT_READY` or `NOT_RUNNING` state in their contexts. The nodes that we cannot connect to via Admin API will also be put into this group with its reason updated with `POD_UNRESPONSIVE`.

Author: I have added a link for RestartReasons details.

   - `WAIT_FOR_LOG_RECOVERY` -  Nodes that have `RECOVERING` state.
   - `RESTART` - Nodes that have non-empty list of reasons from the predicate function and have not been restarted yet (Context.numRestartAttempts == 0).
   - `MAYBE_RECONFIGURE` - Broker nodes (including combined nodes) that have an empty list of reasons and not been reconfigured yet (Context.numReconfigAttempts == 0).
   - `NOP` - Nodes that have at least one restart or reconfiguration attempt (Context.numRestartAttempts > 0 || Context.numReconfigAttempts > 0 ) and have either
             `LEADING_ALL_PREFERRED` or `SERVING` state.

5. Wait for nodes in `WAIT_FOR_LOG_RECOVERY` group to finish performing log recovery. 
   - Wait for nodes to have `SERVING` within the `postOperationalTimeoutMs`. 

>    - If the timeout is reached for a node and its `numRetries` is greater than or equal to `maxRetries`, throw `UnrestartableNodesException` with the log recovery progress (number of remaining logs and segments). Otherwise increment node's `numRetries` and repeat from step 2.

Author: I believe that's correct. That is the current roller's behaviour (there is a proposal for it) and we don't intend to change that with the new roller.

>    - If the timeout is reached for a node and its `numRetries` is greater than or equal to `maxRetries`, throw `UnrestartableNodesException` with the log recovery progress (number of remaining logs and segments). Otherwise increment node's `numRetries` and repeat from step 2.

Reviewer 4: Lets say I have a cluster of 5 nodes, where one of them is doing log recovery at a very slow rate due to some disk issue, and a rolling restart of all nodes is needed for some reason. In this state, the KafkaRoller would repeatedly fail the reconciliation with UnrestartableNodesException before processing pod restarts. Is this correct or am I missing something?

   - Send `incrementalAlterConfig` request with its config updates.
   - Transitions the node's state to `RECONFIGURED` and increment its `numReconfigAttempts`.
   - Wait for each node that got configurations updated until they have `LEADING_ALL_PREFERRED` within the `postOperationalTimeoutMs`.
   - If the `postOperationalTimeoutMs` is reached, repeat from step 2.

9. If at this point, the `RESTART` group is empty and if there is no nodes that is in `NOT_READY` state, the reconciliation will be completed successfully.
   - If there are nodes in `NOT_READY` state, wait for them to have `SERVING` within the `postOperationalTimeoutMs`. 
   - If the timeout is reached for a node and its `numRetries` is greater than or equal to `maxRetries`, throw `TimeoutException`. 
   - Otherwise increment node's `numRetries` and repeat from step 2.
   This is consistent with how the current roller handles unready nodes.

10. Otherwise, batch nodes in `RESTART` group and get the next batch to restart:
   - Further categorize nodes based on their roles so that the following restart order can be enforced:
       1. `NON_ACTIVE_CONTROLLER` - Pure controller that is not the active controller

>        2. `ACTIVE_CONTROLLER` - Pure controller that is the active controller (the quorum leader)

Reviewer 8: Why not always roll the active controller last, whether it is in combined mode or not?

       - remove nodes that have an impact on the availability from the batches (more on this later)
       - return the largest batch
   - If an empty batch is returned, that means none of the nodes met the safety conditions such as availability and qourum health impact. In this case, check their `numRetries` and if any of them is equal to or greater than `maxRetries`, throw `UnrestartableNodesException`. Otherwise increment their `numRetries` and repeat from step 2.

11. Restart the nodes from the returned batch in parallel:
   - If `numRestartAttempts` of a node is larger than `maxRestartAttempts`, throw `MaxRestartsExceededException`.
   - Otherwise, restart each node and transition its state to `RESTARTED` and increment its `numRestartAttempts`.
   - After restarting all the nodes in the batch, wait for their states to become `SERVING` until the configured `postOperationalTimeoutMs` is reached.
   - If the timeout is reached, throw `TimeoutException`. If a node's `numRetries` is greater than or equal to `maxRetries`. Otherwise increment their `numRetries` and repeat from step 2.

>    - After all the nodes are in `SERVING` state, trigger preferred leader elections via Admin client. Wait for their states to become `LEADING_ALL_PREFERRED` until the configured `postOperationalTimeoutMs` is reached. If the timeout is reached, log a `WARN` message. 

Reviewer 4: This is another race condition with CC, that may want to move the leader somewhere else to balance the incoming network traffic.

Author: If the configured imbalance threshold is not reached, wouldn't that mean we still could do unnecessary leader election with the next pod restart?

Reviewer 4: What I meant here is that we shouldn't do something that Kafka does by itself. Or am I missing something?

> 12. If there are no exceptions thrown at this point, the reconciliation completes successfully. If there were `UnrestartableNodesException`, `TimeoutException`, `MaxRestartsExceededException` or any other unexpected exceptions throws, the reconciliation fails.

Reviewer 7: Hmm, seeing this algorithm, makes me think that it would be great to have a TLA+ expert, who would model a KafkaRoller and prove the correctness and safety of this algorithm formally using some safety and liveness properties (e.g., No node should exceed max retries (safety), no simultaneous restart of all controller nodes (safety) or All nodes should eventually be SERVING (liveness)) and more....

Author: @fvaleri might be able to help with this :)

Reviewer 4: TLA+ is certainly a useful tool and this would be a great use case. The problem is that it has a steep learning curve and it requires a lot of practice to really get the benefit out of it. I can write a simple spec, but I lack the experience and time to write anything like this.

Things I don't like much about TLA+: the model you create is so distant from the actual implementation that it doesn't protect you from nasty bugs (see KRaft and Kafka replication protocol), it is really easy to hit the state space explosion so you have to know some mitigation techniques (still it may require big machines to execute the model over multiple days).

#### Quorum health check

The quorum health logic is similar to the current KafkaRoller except for a couple of differences. The current KafkaRoller uses the `controller.quorum.fetch.timeout.ms` config value from the desired configurations passed from the reconciler or uses the hard-coded default value if the reconciler pass null for desired configurations. The new roller will use the configuration value of the active controller. This will mean that the quorum health check is done from the active controller's point of view.

> Also the current KafkaRoller does not connect to the controller via Admin API to get the quorum health information. By the time, we implement this proposal, Strimzi should support Kafka 3.7 which includes [KIP 919](https://cwiki.apache.org/confluence/display/KAFKA/KIP-919%3A+Allow+AdminClient+to+Talk+Directly+with+the+KRaft+Controller+Quorum+and+add+Controller+Registration). Therefore new KafkaRoller will be able to connect to the controller directly for quorum information and active controller's configuration.

Reviewer 7: Should we also add here your recent PR with that change (i.e., https://github.com/strimzi/strimzi-kafka-operator/pull/10016) ?

Author: I will wait to see the outcome of the issue encountered and raised it for Kafka upstream, which will determine if we keep this PR or not.

#### Availability check

The availibility check logic similar to the current KafkaRoller. The ISRs that the broker is part of is checked against the configured under minimum ISR size. If `size(ISR containing the broker) - minISR > 0`, the broker can be considered safe to restart. If it equals to 0, restarting the broker could cause under minimum ISR partition. If it's less than 0, it means the partition is already under minimum ISR and restarting it would either not make a difference or make things worse. In both cases, the broker should not be restarted. 

> However, if `size(ISR containing the broker) - minISR <= 0` but the topic partition is configured with replication size less than minISR, the check will pass to proceed with the broker restart.

Reviewer 8: What's the scenario where we would expect this to happen?

Author: I think this should have been `size(Replicas containing the broker) - minISR <= 0`. This could happen, if, for example, min.insync.replica is configured to 2 but someone creates a topic with replication-factor of 1.

         numRestartAttempts: 1
         numReconfigAttempts: 0
         numRetries: 0
```
3. `combined-3` state becomes `SERVING` and since its `numRestartAttempts` is greater than 1, the roller checks the rest of the nodes. 
4. The roller checks which node is the active controller and finds that `controller-0` is. It then sends a request to the active controller via AdminClient to describe its `controller.quorum.fetch.timeout` config value.
5. It then considers restarting `controller-1` and checks if the quorum health would be impacted. The operator sends a request to to the active controller to describe the quorum replication state. It finds that majority of the follower controllers have caught up with the quorum leader within the `controller.quorum.fetch.timeout.ms`. 
6. The roller restarts `controller-1` as it has no impact on the quorum health. When it has `SERVING` state, the roller repeats the quorum check and restarts `controller-2` and then `controller-0`. 
7. It then considers restarting `combined-4`, so it performs quorum healthcheck and then availability check. Both check passes therefore `combined-4` is restarted. The same is repeated for `combined-5`.

> 8. All controller and combined nodes have `SERVING` state and `numRestartAttempts` set to 1, therefore the roller checks the broker nodes.

Reviewer 4: Why numRestartAttempts matters here? Should we reset to 0?

Author: This is how we make sure all the controller nodes have been restarted, before we proceed to the broker nodes. I will make this clearer.

> 9. It sends a request to describe all the topic partitions, and the following list of topics is returned:

Reviewer 4: I think it will also need to query the broker config to get default min.insync.replica.

```
topic("topic-A"), Replicas(9, 10, 11), ISR(9, 10)
topic("topic-B"), Replicas(6, 7, 8), ISR(6, 7, 8)
topic("topic-C"), Replicas(10, 8, 6), ISR(10, 8, 6)
topic("topic-D"), Replicas(7, 9, 11), ISR(7, 9, 11)
topic("topic-E"), Replicas(6, 10, 11), ISR(6, 10, 11)
```

> They are configured with `min.insync.replica` of 2.

Reviewer 4: I think this will be in the map, so I would add it to the above list.

10. The roller batches the nodes that do not have any topic partition in common and the following batches are created: 
- (11, 8) - `broker-11` and `broker-8` do not share any topic partitions.
- (7) - `broker-7` and `broker-10` do not share any topic partitions, however topic-A is at min ISR, therefore 10 cannot be restarted and is removed from the batch.
- (6) - `broker-6` and `broker-9` do not share any topic partitions, however topic-A is at min ISR, therefore 9 cannot be restarted and is removed from the batch.

> 11. The roller picks the largest batch containing `broker-11` and `broker-8` and restarts them. It waits forthe nodes to have `SERVING` and then `LEADING_ALL_PREFERRED` state.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
11. The roller picks the largest batch containing `broker-11` and `broker-8` and restarts them. It waits for the nodes to have `SERVING` and then `LEADING_ALL_PREFERRED` state.
```

> 11. The roller picks the largest batch containing `broker-11` and `broker-8` and restarts them. It waits forthe nodes to have `SERVING` and then `LEADING_ALL_PREFERRED` state.

Reviewer 8: ```suggestion
11. The roller picks the largest batch containing `broker-11` and `broker-8` and restarts them. It waits for the nodes to have `SERVING` and then `LEADING_ALL_PREFERRED` state.
```

> 12. It then restarts the batch containing only `broker-7` and restart it. It waits for it to have `SERVING` and then `LEADING_ALL_PREFERRED` state.

Reviewer 8: ```suggestion
12. It then restarts the batch containing only `broker-7`. It waits for it to have `SERVING` and then `LEADING_ALL_PREFERRED` state.
```

> 13. It then restarts the batch containing only `broker-6` and restart it. It times out waiting for it to have `SERVING` state because it's still performing log recovery.

Reviewer 8: ```suggestion
13. It then restarts the batch containing only `broker-6`. It times out waiting for it to have `SERVING` state because it's still performing log recovery.
```

14. The roller retries waiting for `broker-6` to have `SERVING` state for a number of times and results in the following context:
```
         nodeRef: broker-6/6
         nodeRoles: broker
         state: RECOVERING
         lastTransition: 987456
         reason:
         numRestartAttempts: 1
         numReconfigAttempts: 0
         numRetries: 10
```

> 15. The `max_retries` of 10 is reached for `broker-6`, therefore the roller throws `UnrestartableNodesException` and the reconciliation fails. The operator logs the number of remaining segments and logs to recover.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
15. The `maxRetries` of 10 is reached for `broker-6`, therefore the roller throws `UnrestartableNodesException` and the reconciliation fails. The operator logs the number of remaining segments and logs to recover.
```

> 16. When the next reconciliation starts, all the nodes are observed and their contexts are updated. `broker-6` node has finished performing log recovery therefore have `SERVING` state. All nodes have no reason to restart. 

Reviewer 8: Brokers 10 and 9 have not been restarted

Author: Good point! I have added them now.

> 17. Broker nodes are checked if their configurations have been updated. `min.insync.replica` has been updated to 1 therefore the roller sends a request containing the configuration update to the brokers and the transitions nodes' state to `RECONFIGURED`. 

Reviewer 8: ```suggestion
17. Broker nodes are checked if their configurations have been updated. `min.insync.replica` has been updated to 1 therefore the roller sends a request containing the configuration update to the brokers and then transitions nodes' state to `RECONFIGURED`. 
```

18. Observe the broker nodes again, and check if they have `LEADING_ALL_PREFERRED` state. 
19. All nodes have `SERVING` or `LEADING_ALL_PREFERRED` and no reason to restart.
20. The reconciliation completes successfully.

### Switching from the old KafkaRoller to the new KafkaRoller

> The new KafkaRoller will only work with KRaft clusters therefore when running in Zookeeper mode, the current KafkaRoller will be used.

Reviewer 7: This would be done simply when a user deploys the KRaft cluster we will use `KafkaRoller v2` or some feature gates be needed?  I assume the first option, so maybe we should clearly state here, which path we are gonna take :)

Author: No feature gate is introduced. The paragraph below it explains that KafkaReconciler will switch to the new roller based on KafkaMetadataState of Kafka CR. Do you think it's not clear enough?

Kafka CR's `KafkaMetadataState` represents where the metadata is stored for the cluster. It is set to `KRaft` when a cluster is fully migrated to KRaft or was created in KRaft mode. KafkaReconciler will be updated to switch to the new roller based on this state. This means the old KafkaRoller will be used during migration of existing clusters from Zookeeper to KRaft mode and the new roller is used only after the migration is completed and for new clusters created in KRaft mode.

### Future improvement

> - We are not looking to solve the potential race condition between KafkaRoller and Cruise Control rebalance activity right away but this is something we can solve in the future. An example scenario that cause this race:

Reviewer 8: ```suggestion
- We are not looking to solve the potential race condition between KafkaRoller and Cruise Control rebalance activity right away but this is something we can solve in the future. An example scenario that could cause this race:
```

>    Let's say we have 5 brokers cluster, minimum in sync replica for topic partition foo-0 is set to 2. The possible sequence of events that could happen:

Reviewer 8: ```suggestion
   Let's say we have a 5 brokers cluster, minimum in sync replicas for topic partition foo-0 is set to 2. The possible sequence of events that could happen is:
```

   - Broker 0 is down due to an issue and the ISR of foo-0 partition changes from [0, 1, 2] to [1 , 2]. In this case producers with acks-all still can produce to this partition.
   - Cruise Control sends `addingReplicas` request to reassign partition foo-0 to broker 4 instead of broker 2 in order to achieve its configured goal.
   - The reassignment request is processed and foo-0 partition now has ISR [1, 2, 4].
   - Cruise Control sends `removingReplicas` request to un-assign the partition from broker 2.
   - KafkaRoller is performing a rolling update to the cluster. It checks the availability impact for foo-0 partition before rolling broker 1. Since partition foo-0 has ISR [1, 2, 4], KafkaRoller decides that it is safe to restart broker 1. It is unaware of the `removingReplicas` request that is about to be processed.
   - The reassignment request is processed and foo-0 partition now has ISR [1, 4].

>    - KafkaRoller restarts broker 1 and foo-0 partition now has ISR [4] which is below the configured minimum in sync replica of 2 resulting in producers with acks-all no longer being able to produce to this partition.

Author: Should this be perhaps included/discussed in a separate proposal or issue? The idea was to mention that there is a race condition we could fix with the new roller in the future, which is not easy to fix with the old roller. How we fix it and other similar problems should be a separate discussion I think.

>    - KafkaRoller restarts broker 1 and foo-0 partition now has ISR [4] which is below the configured minimum in sync replica of 2 resulting in producers with acks-all no longer being able to produce to this partition.

Reviewer 9: Would calling the ListReassigningPartitions API be enough to know this?

## Affected/not affected projects

This proposal affects only

> the [`strimzi-Kafka-operator` GitHub repository](https://github.com/strimzi/strimzi-Kafka-operator).

Reviewer 8: ```suggestion
the [`strimzi-kafka-operator` GitHub repository](https://github.com/strimzi/strimzi-kafka-operator).
```

| maxRestartParallelism  | 1             | Yes             | The maximum number of broker nodes that can be restarted in parallel.                                                                                                                                                                                         |

### Algorithm

1. Initialise a context object for each node with the following data:
```
Context: {
         nodeRef: <NodeRef object passed from KafkaReconciler>
         nodeRoles: <This will be set using the pod labels `strimzi.io/controller-role` and `strimzi.io/broker-role>
         state: UNKNOWN
         lastTransition: <SYSTEM_TIME>
         reason: <Result of the predicate function passed from KafkaReconciler>
         numRestartAttempts: 0
         numReconfigAttempts: 0
         numRetries: 0
}
```
Contexts are recreated in each reconciliation with the initial data above.

2. Observe and transition each node's state to the corresponding state based on the information collected from the abstracted sources. If it can't retrieve any information from the sources, the reconciliation fails and the next reconciliation would start from step 1.

> 3. If there are nodes in `NOT_READY` state, wait for them to have `SERVING` within the `postOperationalTimeoutMs`.  

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
3. If there are nodes in `NOT_READY` state, wait for them to have `SERVING` within the `postOperationTimeoutMs`.  
```
Same change in many places below this line.

       3. `ACTIVE_CONTROLLER` - Pure controller that is the active controller (the quorum leader)
       4. `MIXED_AND_ACTIVE_CONTROLLER` - Mixed node (both controller and broker) and is the active controller (the quorum leader)
       5. `BROKER` - Pure broker

      We expect only one of `ACTIVE_CONTROLLER` and `MIXED_AND_ACTIVE_CONTROLLER` categories to be non-empty as there is only one active controller.
       
      > The batch returned will comprise only one node for all groups except 'BROKER', ensuring that controllers are restarted sequentially. This approach is taken to mitigate the risk of losing quorum when restarting multiple controller nodes simultaneously. A failure to establish quorum due to unhealthy controller nodes directly impacts the brokers and consequently the availability of the cluster. However, restarting broker nodes can be executed without affecting availability. If concurrently restarting brokers do not share any topic partitions, the in-sync replicas (ISRs) of topic partitions will lose no more than one replica, thus preserving availability.
  

>    - If `NON_ACTIVE_PURE_CONTROLLER` group is non empty, return the first node that can be restarted without impacting the quorum health (more on this later).

Reviewer 8: These categories don't quite match with the ones higher up anymore

# Kafka Roller 2.0

## Current situation

The Kafka Roller is an internal Cluster Operator component that's responsible for coordinating the rolling restart or reconfiguration of Kafka pods when:
- non-dynamic reconfigurations needs to be applied
- update in Kafka CRD is detected
- a certificate is renewed

> - pods have been manually annotated by the user for controlled restarts

Reviewer 10: Sure, We can add it

> - pod is stuck and is out of date

Reviewer 10: I assume that the client is not able to communicate with the broker pod and the pod is crashlooping @tinaselenge ?

> - pod is stuck and is out of date

Reviewer 5: if that's the case it's not clear ... at least to me :-)

> - pod is stuck and is out of date

Author: No, out of date means, the pod has an old revision, so it's not running with the desired version or configuration, for example, the container image has changed but it's running the old image. I have reworded this sentence.

> - Kafka broker is unresponsive to Kafka Admin connections

Author: I think we don't send requests at that point, but we initialise Kafka AdminClient instance which I think creates a connection to the nodes. I can't remember if it sends metadata requests at that point though?

> - Kafka broker is unresponsive to Kafka Admin connections

Reviewer 5: Not sure but it's possible yes. Anyway you were referring to the TCP connection which is established when the Kafka Admin instance is created so I guess it makes sense.

A pod is considered stuck if it is in one of following states:
- `CrashLoopBackOff`
- `ImagePullBackOff`
- `ContainerCreating`
- `Pending` and `Unschedulable`

### Known Issues

The existing KafkaRoller suffers from the following shortcomings:

> - Although it is safe and straightforward to restart one broker at a time, this process is slow in large clusters ([related issue](https://github.com/strimzi/strimzi-kafka-operator/issues/8547)).

Reviewer 11: I think historically, we had way more users asking us to _slow down_ the rolling update in various issues by introducing a cool down interval between the restarts. Maybe this should be included here as well as an optional (default to 0) delay.

> - It does not account for partition preferred leadership. As a result, there may be more leadership changes than necessary during a rolling restart, consequently impacting tail latency.

Author: I reworded this little because tail latency perhaps was not the right description. It's more about the impact that it has on clients.

- Hard to reason about when things go wrong. The code is complex to understand and it's not easy to determine why a pod was restarted from logs that tend to be noisy.

> - Potential race condition between Cruise Control rebalance and KafkaRoller that could cause partitions under minimum in sync replica. This issue is described in more detail in the `Future Improvements` section.

Author: This was raised in the strimzi slack channel a while ago, should I link it here? I have added more details the potential scenario later in the proposal.

> - Potential race condition between Cruise Control rebalance and KafkaRoller that could cause partitions under minimum in sync replica. This issue is described in more detail in the `Future Improvements` section.

Reviewer 3: In general Slack is not really ideal for keeping details of problems in the long term. Better to create an issue, which can be discovered more easily by anyone who faces a similar problem.

> - Potential race condition between Cruise Control rebalance and KafkaRoller that could cause partitions under minimum in sync replica. This issue is described in more detail in the `Future Improvements` section.

Author: I can raise an issue for this.

- The current code for KafkaRoller does not easily allow growth and adding new functionality due to its complexity.

The following non-trivial fixes and changes are missing from the current KafkaRoller's KRaft implementation:

> - Currently KafkaRoller has to connect to brokers successfully in order to get KRaft quorum information and determine whether a controller node can be restarted. This is because it was not possible to directly talk to KRaft controllers at the time before [KIP 919](https://cwiki.apache.org/confluence/display/KAFKA/KIP-919%3A+Allow+AdminClient+to+Talk+Directly+with+the+KRaft+Controller+Quorum+and+add+Controller+Registration) was implemented. The issue is raised [here](https://github.com/strimzi/strimzi-kafka-operator/issues/9692).

Author: Yes. At the time of writing, KIP-919 was implemented but not used in Strimzi yet so the idea was to implement this in the new roller, but now that's blocked behind another upstream [issue](https://issues.apache.org/jira/browse/KAFKA-16781). I can remove this section, as it's now missing because of upstream.

- KafkaRoller takes a long time to reconcile mixed nodes if they are all in `Pending` state. This is because a mixed node does not become ready until the quorum is formed and KafkaRoller waits for a pod to become ready before it attempts to restart other nodes. In order for the quorum to form, at least the majority of controller nodes need to be running at the same time. This is not easy to solve in the current KafkaRoller without introducing some major changes because it processes each node individually and there is no mechanism to restart multiple nodes in parallel. More information can be found [here](https://github.com/strimzi/strimzi-kafka-operator/issues/9426).

> - The quorum health check relies on the `controller.quorum.fetch.timeout.ms` configuration, which is determined by the desired configuration values. However, during certificate reconciliation or manual rolling updates, KafkaRoller doesn't have access to these desired configuration values since they shouldn't prompt any configuration changes. As a result, the quorum health check defaults to using the hard-coded default value of `controller.quorum.fetch.timeout.ms` instead of the correct configuration value during manual rolling updates or when rolling nodes for certificate renewal.

Author: True. However, the workaround we currently have can be improved, not to use hard-coded config value when doing quorum health check.

## Motivation

Strimzi users have been reporting some of the issues mentioned above and would benefit from a new KafkaRoller that is designed to address the shortcomings of the current KafkaRoller.

The current KafkaRoller has complex and nested conditions therefore makes it challenging for users to debug and understand actions taken on their brokers when things go wrong and configure it correctly for their use cases. It is also not particularly easy to unit test which results in insufficient test coverage for many edge cases, making it challenging to refactor safely. Therefore, refactoring becomes essential to enhance test coverage effectively. A new KafkaRoller that is redesigned to be simpler would help users to easily understand the code and configure it to their needs.

As you can see above, the current KafkaRoller still needs various changes and potentially more as we get more experience with KRaft and discover more issues. Adding these non trivial changes to a component that is very complex and hard to reason, is expensive and poses potential risks of introducing bugs because of tightly coupled logics and lack of testability.

## Proposal

> The objective of this proposal is to introduce a new KafkaRoller with simplified logic having a structured design resembling a finite state machine. KafkaRoller decisions are informed by observations coming from different sources (e.g. Kubernetes API, KafkaAgent, Kafka Admin API). These sources will be abstracted so that KafkaRoller is not dependent on their specifics as long as it's getting the information it needs. The abstractions also enable much better unit testing.

Author: ok, I will improve this section.

Depending on the observed states, the roller will perform specific actions. Those actions should cause a subsequent observation to cause a state transition. This iterative process continues until each node's state aligns with the desired state.

It will also introduce an algorithm that can restart brokers in parallel when safety conditions are not violated. These conditions guarantee Kafka producer availability and cause minimal impact on controllers and overall stability of clusters.

### Node State
When a new reconciliation starts up, a context object is created for each node to store the state and other useful information used by the roller. It will have the following fields:

 - <i>nodeRef</i>: NodeRef object that contains Node ID.
 - <i>currentNodeRole</i>: Currently assigned process roles for this node (e.g. controller, broker).

>  - <i>lastKnownState</i>: It contains the last known state of the node based on information collected from the abstracted sources (Kubernetes API, KafkaAgent and Kafka Admin API). The table below describes the possible states.

Author: This is the states described below it. I think when I changed the field name to `lastKnownState`, that may have made it confusing. I will fix this.

 - <i>numRestartAttempts</i>: The value is incremented each time the node has been attempted to restart.
 - <i>numReconfigAttempts</i>: The value is incremented each time the node has been attempted to reconfigure.
 - <i>numRetries</i>: The value is incremented each time the node cannot be restarted/reconfigured due to not meeting safety conditions (more on this later).
 - <i>lastTransitionTime</i>: System.nanoTime of last observed state transition.

 The following table illustrates the proposed node states and the possible transitions:
 | State            | Description      | Possible transitions |
 | :--------------- | :--------------- | :----------- |
 | UNKNOWN               | The initial state when creating `Context` for a node. We expect to transition from this state fairly quickly after creating the context for nodes.  | `NOT_RUNNING` `NOT_READY` `RECOVERING` `SERVING` |
 | NOT_RUNNING           | Node is not running (Kafka process is not running). This is determined via Kubernetes API, more details for it below. | `NOT_READY`, `NOT_RUNNING`. | `RESTARTED` `SERVING` | 

>  | NOT_READY             | Node is running but not ready to serve requests which is determined by Kubernetes readiness probe (broker state < 2 OR == 127 OR controller is not listening on port). | `RESTARTED` `SERVING` |

Reviewer 11: Where do the states such as init container, PodInitialization etc. fit in between these two states? In that state, the Pod is scheduled and some parts of it are running. But not the Kafka process. So it seems to fall between these two states right now.

Author: I believe this would fall to `NOT_READY` category. NOT_RUNNING has a specific criteria, which is very similar to the criteria of stuck pods in the current roller.

Reviewer 11: I think that makes sense. But please add it to the state explanation as right now it suggests it would not belong there.

Author: There is already `NOT_RUNNING` section right below the table, explaining this.

 | RESTARTED             | After successful `kubectl delete pod`. | `NOT_RUNNING` `NOT_READY` `RECOVERING` `SERVING` |

>  | RECONFIGURED          | After successful Kafka node config update via Admin client. | `NOT_RUNNING` `NOT_READY` `RESTARTED` `SERVING` |

Author: The states don't necessarily align with Kubernetes states but I do see what you mean, as most states align with underlying systems. I thought It's useful to know that an action has been successfully taken on the node, so for example, the state transitions from `READY` -> `RESTARTED` -> `READY`. However, I guess the `numRestartAttempts`/`maxReconfigAttempts` indicates the action too so perhaps these states (`RESTARTED`/`RECONFIGURED`) are not needed.

>  | RECONFIGURED          | After successful Kafka node config update via Admin client. | `NOT_RUNNING` `NOT_READY` `RESTARTED` `SERVING` |

Reviewer 11: I think that if you need some transitional state for some technical reasons, would it be better to describe the uncertainty after the operation? E.g. `READY` -> `UNKNOWN` (after the restart) -> `???` (e.g. READY after the next check)?

That said, purely from the Kubernetes perspective:
* The roller deletes the Pod, it does not restart it. So it actually transitions it to `NOT_RUNNING` after it is deleted
* The StirmziPodSetController starts the pod again which is when it might move to `NOT_READY` and later to `READY`

But that reminds me ... there will be also `Terminating` phase I guess that might be there long enough for you to map it somewhere?

>  | RECONFIGURED          | After successful Kafka node config update via Admin client. | `NOT_RUNNING` `NOT_READY` `RESTARTED` `SERVING` |

Reviewer 5: > We want the states to also reflect the action taken on the pods. So that when we do the observation again, we wait for the state to change to NOT_READY, or READY kind of states.

I think it would be better having some additional fields in the node context taking track of restarted/reconfigured if you need them. But I think they are not actual states within an FSM.

>  | RECONFIGURED          | After successful Kafka node config update via Admin client. | `NOT_RUNNING` `NOT_READY` `RESTARTED` `SERVING` |

Reviewer 10: Wouldn't `RESTARTED` will mean somewhat similar to `UNKNOWN` in this case? It would only mean that  the pod was restarted and not it can can  be `Ready` or `notReady` in the next phase while at the same it also clarifies the action which is taken i.e(the pod is restarted)

>  | RECONFIGURED          | After successful Kafka node config update via Admin client. | `NOT_RUNNING` `NOT_READY` `RESTARTED` `SERVING` |

Author: @tombentley @ShubhamRwt any thoughts on this? I think removing the action states and using the unknown state after the action is taken is ok too.

 | RECOVERING            | Node has started but is in log recovery (broker state == 2). | `SERVING` |

>  | SERVING               | Node is in running state and ready to serve requests which is determined by Kubernetes readiness probe (broker state >= 3 AND != 127 OR controller is listening on port). | `RESTARTED` `RECONFIGURED` `LEADING_ALL_PREFERRED` |

Reviewer 5: I would agree with Jakub, why not using `READY` here?

>  | LEADING_ALL_PREFERRED | Node is in running state and leading all preferred replicas. | None

Reviewer 5: Also how does it map with SERVING (or READY) state? I would expect the node to be ready and serving. The fact it's "leading all preferred" is not a node state imho, more part of the node context.

>  | LEADING_ALL_PREFERRED | Node is in running state and leading all preferred replicas. | None

Author: > No transition states?

LEADING_ALL_PREFERRED is the final desired state, once the pod reaches this state, the roller won't do anything with it and complete the reconciliation if all pods are in this state. However, it is possible for the pod to become unhealthy and go into `NOT_READY`, `NOT_RUNNING` states too. So I added those as possible states transition into. 

> Also, what exactly does this mean?
That this node is leader only for the partitions where it is the preferred leader?
That all partitions where this node is the preferred leader have a leader in this node?
In other words, a ndoe that is leader for a partition for which it is not the preferred leader - is it LEADING_ALL_PREFERRED? I think this has an impact on the amount of disruption caused down the road by the roller and should be clarified.

This state is observed for pods individually. I believe it means that the particular pod is leading all the partitions which it is the preferred leader for, but it could still be leading other partitions that it is not the preferred leader for too. After restarting a node, we would wait for it to lead the partitions that they are preferred leader for. In the end, the desire is that all nodes have `LEADING_ALL_PREFERRED` state, which means  that all partitions are being led by the preferred leaders. 

> Also how does it map with SERVING (or READY) state? I would expect the node to be ready and serving. The fact it's "leading all preferred" is not a node state imho, more part of the node context.

Yes, a node can transition into `LEADING_ALL_PREFERRED`, only if it is already in `READY` state  as described in the "Possible transitions" column. It is a state in KafkaRoller sense similar to `RESTARTED` and `RECONFIGURED`, but not a state that matches the system such as Kubernetes states or Broker States. I think we need to discuss and agree what we want to consider as states and whether that need to match the system states. 

(cc: @tombentley @ShubhamRwt )

> The definitions of broker states can be found via the following link: [Broker States](https://github.com/apache/kafka/blob/3.7/metadata/src/main/java/org/apache/kafka/metadata/BrokerState.java).

Author: But currently we do rely on the broker states, to do the readiness check and find if node is doing log recovery. I can add that this may change or not mention broker states at all.

> The definitions of broker states can be found via the following link: [Broker States](https://github.com/apache/kafka/blob/3.7/metadata/src/main/java/org/apache/kafka/metadata/BrokerState.java).

Reviewer 11: Basically, I do not understand why the link is here:
* Are you just saying it was used as an source to know what states there are?
* Does it mean we need to update the code anytime the state changes to add our own new states?
* Will we include this class directly in our code and use the states from it?

> The definitions of broker states can be found via the following link: [Broker States](https://github.com/apache/kafka/blob/3.7/metadata/src/main/java/org/apache/kafka/metadata/BrokerState.java).

Author: > Are you just saying it was used as an source to know what states there are?

Yes, just to give a context when we talk about broker states in general.

> Does it mean we need to update the code anytime the state changes to add our own new states?

Unlikely. Unless enums of the broker states change upstream and suddenly they mean different things. As long as the change don't affect the readiness check and recovery state, we wouldn't need to worry about it I think. 

> Will we include this class directly in our code and use the states from it?

No. The link is there just there as an information. How we check the broker state is not changing in the new roller. It's same as the current roller (via KafkaAgent).

> The definitions of broker states can be found via the following link: [Broker States](https://github.com/apache/kafka/blob/3.7/metadata/src/main/java/org/apache/kafka/metadata/BrokerState.java).

Author: I can clarify why the link is shared or remove the link.

The definitions of the possible restart reasons can be found via the following link: [Restart Reasons](https://github.com/strimzi/strimzi-kafka-operator/blob/0.40.0/cluster-operator/src/main/java/io/strimzi/operator/cluster/model/RestartReason.java)

> #### NOT_RUNNING state

Reviewer 5: why does this state need a dedicated section? what about the others?

Author: It needed a more details than the other ones, so rather than adding a big paragraph in the table, I separated it out.

If one of the following is true, then node's state is `NOT_RUNNING:
- no pod exists for this node
- unable to get the `Pod Status` for the pod 
- the pod has `Pending` status with `Unschedulable` reason
- the pod has container status `ContainerStateWaiting` with `CrashLoopBackOff` or `ImagePullBackOff` reason
If none of the above is true but the node is not ready, then its state would be `NOT_READY`.

#### Flow diagram describing the overall flow of the states

> ![The new roller flow](./images/06x-new-roller-flow.png)

Reviewer 5: Some comments about the diagram of the FSM ...

1. Each state has to be unique and not duplicated.
2. If you are grouping states together, does it really mean they are different state? Or are they different state with different context? It looks weird to me.
3. Where you use "Action and Transition State" I think that: Action should be cleared, because it represents an output for the FSM? Is there a real output or just transition? You don't need "Transition State" because it's defined by the arrow you have.

My gut general feeling is that ... you are describing a very complex state machine and transitions in the "Algorithm" section but then the visualization of it is really weak.

Author: I meant the diagram to be more from high level and then broken down with more details in the Algorithm section. Given that, we may have to change various things around states and stuff, I will take this suggestion and recreate the diagram.

Reviewer 5: Is the diagram changed after my comments? It seems almost the same. Also, what's "Serving" or "Waiting" or "Restarted" or "Reconfigured" ... they are not listed as states in the table above. 
I can't really match the table with the diagram, sorry :-(

Author: @ppatierno I have updated the diagram now. It's still more of high level flow showing the transitions. The possible states are listed but does not mean they are grouped together. Depending on the state, a different action taken and the possible actions are also listed. Do you think it's clearer now? Or do you think I should break down to each state mapping to the possible actions, instead of listing them together in a same bubble?

Reviewer 5: well an FSM state machine should have single states (but I can understand your grouping of more than one here, so let's leave it for now). What I can't understand is what's the hexagon and it's content. They are not states, right? I can't see them in the table. So their presence confuses me.
Also you are duplicating circles for Not_Ready/Not_Running/Recovery: you have one with them and Ready, and one with them alone. I think you should split and having Ready on its own, as well as Leading_All_preferred.
Finally as an FSM state diagram it should not contain other stuff like "Start" or "Desired State Reached", you are describing an FSM, and those ones are not states.

Author: Thanks for the feedback @ppatierno, I made another update on the diagram. Please let me know what you think.

Author: Good to hear that it is in the right direction. I've taken the suggestion and made another update :). Thanks @ppatierno

Reviewer 5: What does exactly "Iterate" mean on the orange arrows?

Author: that's repeating the process on node if the desired state is not reached.

### Configurability
The following can be the configuration options for the new KafkaRoller:

> | Configuration          | Default value | Exposed to user | Description                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   |

Reviewer 5: general question on the "Exposed to user" column. What's the rational behind deciding to not expose some of them to the user? Could all of them helping if users are dealing with different environments, different latency, network conditions, where changing all of them could help?

Author: We could if we think that's useful. We followed what the current roller does, it doesn't expose how many attempts are allowed for each pod (maxAttempts is set to 10 by the reconciler).

|:-----------------------|:--------------|:----------------|:--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| maxRestartAttempts     | 3             | No              | The maximum number of times a node can be restarted before failing the reconciliation. This is checked against the node's `numRestartAttempts`.                                                                                                               |

> | maxReconfigAttempts    | 3             | No              | The maximum number of times a node can be reconfigured before restarting it. This is checked against the node's `numReconfigAttempts`.                                                                                                                        |

Reviewer 5: "dynamically" reconfigured you mean?

> | maxRetries             | 10            | No              | The maximum number of times a node can be retried after not meeting the safety conditions. This is checked against the node's `numRetries`.                                                                                                                      |

Reviewer 5: I don't get this ... "retried" what? I mean, and sure it's me no being a native English, but what does exactly `The maximum number of times a node can be retried after not meeting the safety conditions` mean?

Author: I tried rephrasing this section, do you think it is clearer?

Reviewer 5: what I see in the PR is now something like "The maximum number of times a node can be retried for  This is checked against the node's `numRetries`. " ... I think something is missing after "for".

Author: ah sorry, I updated the explanation on numRetries, but not this one. I will add that in.

> | postOperationTimeoutMs | 60 seconds    | Yes             | The maximum amount of time we will wait for nodes to transition to `SERVING` state after an operation in each retry. This will be based on the operation timeout that is already exposed to the user via environment variable `STRIMZI_OPERATION_TIMEOUT_MS`. |

Author: it is the same timeout, just named differently in the new roller. I can change it back to `operationTimeoutMs` and clarify that this is a new value we introduced.

> | postOperationTimeoutMs | 60 seconds    | Yes             | The maximum amount of time we will wait for nodes to transition to `SERVING` state after an operation in each retry. This will be based on the operation timeout that is already exposed to the user via environment variable `STRIMZI_OPERATION_TIMEOUT_MS`. |

Reviewer 11: Yeah, I think it is a bit confusing. You should either stick with the one we have. Or if you think it needs to be independent, then add it as a new timeout, but skip the link to the existing one.

| maxRestartParallelism  | 1             | Yes             | The maximum number of broker nodes that can be restarted in parallel.                                                                                                                                                                                         |

> ### Algorithm

Reviewer 5: I found the following section difficult to read. Maybe we should try to structure it to make it easier.
By "structure" I mean not having just a bunch of sentences saying "if this then this but if this then that" and so on. But more something like:

<STATE> - <INPUT> - <OUTPUT> - <NEXTSTATE>

Where <INPUT> would be the observation you make and what you have from the context I assume. The <OUTPUT> would be any action taken on nodes (and maybe any update on the context? maybe not because it's rebuilt on each reconciliation and not stored anywhere).
I am just trying to figure out a way to make the algorithm more understandable. This comment copes with the one on the FSM diagram as well.

Author: I will take this into consideration and see how we can present the algorithm better without too much repetition which was the aim with it.

```
Contexts are recreated in each reconciliation with the initial data above.

2. Observe and transition each node's state to the corresponding state based on the information collected from the abstracted sources. If it can't retrieve any information from the sources, the reconciliation fails and the next reconciliation would start from step 1.

3. If there are nodes in `NOT_READY` state, wait for them to have `SERVING` within the `postOperationTimeoutMs`.  
   We want to give nodes chance to get ready before we try to connect to them or consider them for rolling. This is important especially for nodes which were just started.
   This is consistent with how the current roller handles unready nodes.
   - If the timeout is reached, proceed to the next step and check if any of the nodes need to be restarted.

4. Group the nodes into the following categories based on their state and connectivity:
   - `RESTART_FIRST` - Nodes that have `NOT_READY` or `NOT_RUNNING` state in their contexts. The nodes that we cannot connect to via Admin API will also be put into this group with its reason updated with `POD_UNRESPONSIVE`.
   - `WAIT_FOR_LOG_RECOVERY` -  Nodes that have `RECOVERING` state.

>    - `RESTART` - Nodes that have non-empty list of reasons from the predicate function and have not been restarted yet (Context.numRestartAttempts == 0).

Reviewer 5: Maybe `TO_BE_RESTARTED` sounds better?

Author: I'm not sure, then all of them would need to be changed with `TO_BE` prefix.

Reviewer 10: +1 Tina

Reviewer 5: Ok, but how we can make a better differentiation between `RESTART` and `RESTART_FIRST`. In general I think a state name should try to be clear, without the need to read its description in details.

Author: These are not state names, more like action names that nodes being categorised into but yes, we can certainly make a better differentiation between the 2. Perhaps, it could be `RESTART_UNREADY` and `RESTART_READY`?

   - `MAYBE_RECONFIGURE` - Broker nodes (including mixed nodes) that have an empty list of reasons and not been reconfigured yet (Context.numReconfigAttempts == 0).

>    - `NOP` - Nodes that have at least one restart or reconfiguration attempt (Context.numRestartAttempts > 0 || Context.numReconfigAttempts > 0 ) and have either

Reviewer 5: I guess these are the ones on which KafkaRoller will take no actions (NOP=No OPeration) during this reconciliation.

             `LEADING_ALL_PREFERRED` or `SERVING` state.

5. Wait for nodes in `WAIT_FOR_LOG_RECOVERY` group to finish performing log recovery. 
   - Wait for nodes to have `SERVING` within the `postOperationTimeoutMs`. 
   - If the timeout is reached for a node and its `numRetries` is greater than or equal to `maxRetries`, throw `UnrestartableNodesException` with the log recovery progress (number of remaining logs and segments). Otherwise increment node's `numRetries` and repeat from step 2.

6. Restart nodes in `RESTART_FIRST` category:
   - if one or more nodes have `NOT_RUNNING` state, we first need to check 2 special conditions:

>       - If all of the nodes are mixed and are in `NOT_RUNNING` state, restart them in parallel to give the best chance of forming the quorum.

Author: > Don't NOT_RUNNING nodes with dedicated controller node need parallel restart as well?
Initially, was only trying to solve the issue for the combined nodes because regular controllers don't have this issue (they have a different readiness check) but actually that's a good point. It does make sense to do the parallel restarts for the dedicated controller nodes too. That would simply cases such as cluster having dedicated and combined nodes, all of which are in pending state. 

> Should there be some sorting based on role to handle controllers first
Yes, we do sort them into groups first to maintain the order of controllers, mixed nodes and brokers.  I will make this clearer. 

> Can't all the NOT_RUNNING nodes be handled in parallel in general? They are not running, so there is no need to handle them one by one in any situation. Or?
That could be more efficient way to recover the NOT_RUNNING nodes that have old revisions.

>       - If all of the nodes are mixed and are in `NOT_RUNNING` state, restart them in parallel to give the best chance of forming the quorum.

Author: So I have tested the following changes:
- If all controllers are in NOT_RUNNING state, including pure and combined controllers, then we restart them in parallel. 
- All NOT_RUNNING nodes that have old revision will be handled in parallel as suggested but this includes nodes with any role, e.g. controller and broker nodes can get restarted at the same time. Do you think we should separate them by roles?
- When restarting nodes unresponsive to connections, in case there are more than one, they will be restarted one by one, in the order of pure controller, combined and broker. 

Do you think this changes make sense? If yes, I will go ahead and update the proposal.

   
   - Otherwise the nodes will be attempted to restart one by one in the following order:
      - Pure controller nodes
      - Mixed nodes
      - Broker only nodes
      
   - Wait for the restarted node to have `SERVING` within `postOperationTimeoutMs`. If the timeout is reached and the node's `numRetries` is greater than or equal to `maxRetries`, throw `TimeoutException`. Otherwise increment node's `numRetries` and repeat from step 2. 

7. Further refine the broker nodes in `MAYBE_RECONFIGURE` group:
   - Describe Kafka configurations for each node via Admin API and compare them against the desired configurations. This is essentially the same mechanism we use today for the current KafkaRoller.
   - If a node has configuration changes and they can be dynamically updated, add the node into another group called `RECONFIGURE`.
   - If a node has configuration changes but they cannot be dynamically updated, add the node into the `RESTART` group.
   - If a node has no configuration changes, put the node into the `NOP` group.

> 8. Reconfigure each node in `RECONFIGURE` group:

Author: We sort nodes that are in MAYBE_RECONFIGURE into RECONFIGURE or RESTART groups. The reason for doing the RECONFIGURE first, to see if we can successfully configure the node dynamically. If configuration update fails, then it will be put into `RESTART` group.

> 8. Reconfigure each node in `RECONFIGURE` group:

Reviewer 11: Fair enough, but:
* The names still differ between here and the list of groups on lines 129-134
* A nit, but it might be easier to read if the order of the groups on lines 129-134 is the same as in which you process it

  
   - If `NON_ACTIVE_CONTROLLER` group is non empty, return the first node that can be restarted without impacting the quorum health (more on this later).
   - If `MIXED_AND_NOT_ACTIVE_CONTROLLER` group is non empty, return the first node that can be restarted without impacting the quorum health and the availability.
   - If `ACTIVE_CONTROLLER` group is non empty, return the node if it can be restarted without impacting the quorum health. Otherwise return an empty set.
   - If `MIXED_AND_ACTIVE_CONTROLLER`  group is non empty, return the node if it can be restarted without impacting the quorum health and the availability. Otherwise return an empty set.
   - If `BROKER` group is non empty, batch the broker nodes:
       - build a map of nodes and their replicating partitions by sending describeTopics request to Admin API
       - batch the nodes that do not have any partitions in common therefore can be restarted together
       - remove nodes that have an impact on the availability from the batches (more on this later)

>        - return the largest batch

Author: I have tested this on 9 broker node cluster. I  think we should definitely test this on larger cluster. 

I put details on rack boundaries in the the rejected alternative section as something that was already considered, but of course we all need to agree first whether to reject it or not.

   - If an empty batch is returned, that means none of the nodes met the safety conditions such as availability and qourum health impact. In this case, check their `numRetries` and if any of them is equal to or greater than `maxRetries`, throw `UnrestartableNodesException`. Otherwise increment their `numRetries` and repeat from step 2.

11. Restart the nodes from the returned batch in parallel:
   - If `numRestartAttempts` of a node is larger than `maxRestartAttempts`, throw `MaxRestartsExceededException`.
   - Otherwise, restart each node and transition its state to `RESTARTED` and increment its `numRestartAttempts`.
   - After restarting all the nodes in the batch, wait for their states to become `SERVING` until the configured `postOperationTimeoutMs` is reached.
   - If the timeout is reached, throw `TimeoutException`. If a node's `numRetries` is greater than or equal to `maxRetries`. Otherwise increment their `numRetries` and repeat from step 2.

>    - After all the nodes are in `SERVING` state, trigger preferred leader elections via Admin client. Wait for their states to become `LEADING_ALL_PREFERRED` until the configured `postOperationTimeoutMs` is reached. If the timeout is reached, log a `WARN` message. 

Author: Should this a separate configrable timeout or use the existing operationalTimeout? For example, we could wait for nodes to lead all the preferred partitions until the operation timeout reached. If timed out, only then we trigger leader realignment. Once requested to realign, we have another operational timeout to wait for it to complete.

>    - After all the nodes are in `SERVING` state, trigger preferred leader elections via Admin client. Wait for their states to become `LEADING_ALL_PREFERRED` until the configured `postOperationTimeoutMs` is reached. If the timeout is reached, log a `WARN` message. 

Reviewer 11: I think operationalTimeout would be too long for most cases. So it would need a separate one.

   - Cruise Control sends `removingReplicas` request to un-assign the partition from broker 2.
   - KafkaRoller is performing a rolling update to the cluster. It checks the availability impact for foo-0 partition before rolling broker 1. Since partition foo-0 has ISR [1, 2, 4], KafkaRoller decides that it is safe to restart broker 1. It is unaware of the `removingReplicas` request that is about to be processed.
   - The reassignment request is processed and foo-0 partition now has ISR [1, 4].
   - KafkaRoller restarts broker 1 and foo-0 partition now has ISR [4] which is below the configured minimum in sync replica of 2 resulting in producers with acks-all no longer being able to produce to this partition.

## Affected/not affected projects

This proposal affects only
the [`strimzi-kafka-operator` GitHub repository](https://github.com/strimzi/strimzi-kafka-operator).

## Compatibility

The new KafkaRoller introduced by this proposal will used only for KRaft based clusters.
This proposal should have no impact on any existing Kafka clusters deployed with ZooKeeper.

## Rejected

- Why not use rack information when batching brokers that can be restarted at the same time?

> When all replicas of all partitions have been assigned in a rack-aware way then brokers in the same rack trivially share no partitions, and so racks provide a safe partitioning. However nothing in a broker, controller or cruise control is able to enforce the rack-aware property therefore assuming this property is unsafe. Even if CC is being used and rack aware replicas is a hard goal we can't be certain that other tooling hasn't reassigned some replicas since the last rebalance, or that no topics have been created in a rack-unaware way.

Reviewer 5: I am not sure the above is considered a rejected alternative. I mean, this section is for solutions for the same goals which were rejected, while it seems to be used just to highlight that an "idea" within the current proposal was rejected.

Author: of course, we would need to agree if we are rejecting this idea. Perhaps I should rename this into other ideas considered?
